---
layout: post
title: "Competent cell, CaCl2 method"
date: 2024-11-07
categories: [Lab protocol]
tags: [Competent cell, Protocol]
---

# Competent Cells Preparation and Transformation Protocol

## Reference
- 2017, Chemotransformation of bacterial cells without heat-shock
- 2017, Making Calcium Competent Cells protocol - iGEM

## Materials
1. 5ml LB broth (Seed culture)
2. 100ml LB broth (Main culture)
3. 25ml 0.1M CaCl2 (Wash buffer)
4. 5ml 0.1M CaCl2 with 15% glycerol (Suspension buffer)
   *All supplies were subjected to high temperature sterilization before use.

## Procedure
1. **Streaking**: Streak E. coli cells onto fresh LB solid media, followed by incubation at 37 °C for 14 hours.
2. **Inoculation**: Inoculate E. coli colonies into fresh LB liquid media, followed by shaking incubation at 37 °C for 16 hours.
3. **Transfer Culture**: Transfer 1 mL of the overnight cell culture into 100 mL of fresh LB, shaking and incubating at 37 °C until the OD600 reaches 0.4.
   - (Seed an overnight culture at a 1:100 dilution in LB. Warning: Do not let the OD600 exceed 0.5 or poor competent cells will result.)
4. **Chilling**: Incubate the cells on ice for 1 hour.
5. **Centrifugation**: Centrifuge at 4 °C (4000 r/min, 10 min).
6. **Re-suspension**: Gently re-suspend the cell pellet using 25 mL of precooled 0.1M CaCl2.
   - (*Resuspend the cells in 1/4 volume of ice-cold 0.1M CaCl2*)
7. **Incubation**: Incubate the resulting cell suspension on ice for 20 minutes.
   - (*Optimal transformation frequency requires at least 1 hour on ice; ideal incubation is 12-16 hours at 4 °C*)
8. **Centrifugation**: Centrifuge again at 4 °C (4000 r/min, 10 min).
9. **Final Re-suspension**: Gently re-suspend the cell pellet using 1 mL of precooled 0.1M CaCl2 with 10% w/v glycerol.
   - (*Final concentration: 15 OD600 units/ml; for example, 100ml with OD 0.4 results in xml: OD 15*)
10. **Final Incubation**: Incubate the resulting cell suspension on ice for 30 minutes.
11. **Aliquoting**: Divide the mixture into small aliquots and transfer to a -80 °C freezer.

## Transforming the Cells
1. Remove an aliquot of competent cells and let them thaw completely on ice.
2. Add up to 10 µl of DNA to 100 µl of competent cells.
3. Incubate on ice for at least 1 hour with periodic vortexing (every 20 minutes) to ensure even distribution and prevent settling.
4. **Heat Shock**: Heat shock cells at 42 °C for 90 seconds.
   - (The transformation efficiency of the non-heat-shock method may be slightly better than that of the classic heat-shock approach if the DNA-cell incubation time approaches 0.5-1 h.)
5. Add 100 µl of LB and plate on the appropriate selective media.
